# Remote VOCamp 26 April 2019

## Agenda
1. Chuck Vardeman: scoping of session
    a. State of schema.org and Science on Schema (possibly Adam Shepard)
    b. Competency questions (What questions are users and maintainers going to want to ask of the data via the web)
    c. Possible topics/avenues to pursue
2. All: Start working on design
    a. What needs to be in place to enable above
    b. Which of the above questions are currently answerable and where are their gaps
    c. What tools stacks are currently in place supporting the answerable questions?
    d. What infrastructure is needed to fill the gaps
    e. How/what technologies and on what timelines could such be filled
    f. ...TBD…

Attending: Jane Wyngaard, Chuck Vardeman, Christine Laney, Adam Shepard, Jeremy Sampson, Steve Jacobs, Steve Stone
• [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1VyeVC4szcltI4KVNhCAok8yFQ3hfC6FvUo3cnCOm4Yg/edit#slide=id.g4ba3943af6_0_436)

## Discussion:
- Steve: Busy refactoring location tree model (currently in a BD as a tree not graph) need to ingest into pachyderm.  Is there overlap between this refactoring and schema pattern modeling?
- Chuck ideal: want a restful replication of that graph that an external scientist can search/traverse) 
- Steve: sees the point from portal, but also need this from a data processing pipeline perspective: i.e need efficiency in data model from a processing perspective (not have to traverse entire graph for all tasks etc).  Many tech stacks good for portal but not processing. ….
    • Location tree currently based on site construction
    • Kaylen, Cho and some others better placed
    • DGraph?
- Chuck: Issue possibly needs a separate effort
- Adam Shepard on P419
- Technical director BCO-DMO (been using linked data since 2012), NSF Earth Cube effort, worked on Geolink ([paper](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-25010-6_19) - useful design pattern case study)
- P418: effort to get more data repos using schema.org to improve findability
- P419:  Schema.org as is, is quite rigid, so working to improve ability to express temporal and spatial metadata, and how to describe dataset services.  Also building a bunch of tooling
- Examples: https://github.com/earthcubearchitecture-project418/p418Vocabulary/tree/master/html/voc/static/schema/examples/repository
 
- Steve Jacobs: Could this help traceability of transition engines
- Tom: This looks like it could help NEON get closer to FAIR?
    - Christine: Highest priority is to make NEON data discoverable.  Other:
        -  NEON has a controlled vocabulary, and do use Darwin Core, and some others - would like to  improve these eg by mapping them, Vocab is very flat (relationships between them isn’t there).  Also not machine readable
        - Increase accessibility (both human and machine eg streaming data to 3rd party processing)
        - Storage would benefit (but doesn’t require) this level of formal mapping
- Chuck: Could we create a road map to:
    - schema.org representation
    - make NEON data linked (beyond schema.org)
    - need for top level NEON URIs
- Christine > Adam.  Docker container mechanics?
    - Docker was a means of helping repos: contains the code to harvest data from webpages and throws them into indexing: tika, spatial index, 3rd one
    - Tools coming (currently funded): a GUI to help repos generate schema.org, 
    - Of the demo repos some are generating static, js, 
- Tom: What about logical cross mappings…. Eg mosquitoes > virus >  health issues.  Does/how do enable that level of discoverability
    - Chuck: Envo et al are working on such foundational logics.  Non-trivial to build modular logically engineered ontologies.  Patterns enables the cross linking. 
      - Schema.org is flat (you can’t do any inferencing on it).  Only has annotations
        - Envo & SWEET are now dereferencable.  
        - Gary Bergross, Pierr,  Ruth and Chuck are working on crosswalks from SWEET to ENVO.  Currently working on Cryo ### Some of relevance to NEON vocab  
            * This is a slow effort.  Some areas are easier than others.  
            * Step1: compare term in ENVO and SWEET, Step2: create some axioms
- All: what to do with rest of our time today
    - Start with NEON Org UID
        - https://github.com/ESIPFed/science-on-schema.org
- Steve: presentation on pacheyderm
    - Needs location information exposed as it massively impacts reprocessing pipeline load
        - So location needs to be exposed to pachyderm but does that impact semantics model
        - How is spatial information organsied: their’s a location tree and Oracle (will be postgres) database 
            - Eg query: what are the closest sensors to X.  Runs easily in oracle, but don’t want to traverse the whole tree every update.  

## Summary:
- Tasks (*not ranked*):
  - Site & location tree modeling with Steve.  2 tasks, separable but should cross-walk-able
    * Jsonld model
    * Workflows model //Pass on to Ewa for now
- To pick a data set effort  - requires a dedicated session with correct people
    * 2 levels of need: (1)practical semantics for portal , and (2) the vocab modeling
    * Some current pages are old (non-react) but planned upgrade
    * Small step: start with HTML header templates 
    * Readme - dynamically generated
    * Pick a Bio model - simplest to start?
    * Pick a physical eg Eddy Cov (they’re already aware of conflicts) //More thorny
- Just the schema.org data set description and incorporation of it into webportal
    * Needs URIs for people and NEON
        - NEON has PIDs through re3 for data
        - Using ORCIDs already
- Vocab improvements (mapping and structure and access)
- Crosswalk vocabs to allows deeper reasoning/discoverability
- Execution Workflows and location > pass on to Ewa’s workflow group?  
- @Christine: select refine data set selection by: simple, ‘mature vocab’, available scientists for next session initial exercise to explore competency questions.  Examples evolving here: https://github.com/ESIPFed/science-on-schema.org/tree/master/examples
- @Jeremey: integrate #NEON into portal
- @Chuck &Adam: ESIP schema.org examples
- @Jane - Steve &Ewa workflows


Example: https://github.com/ESIPFed/science-on-schema.org/blob/master/guides/DataRepository.md

NEON Github instance: https://github.com/NEONScience/NEON-schema.org/blob/master/data_repository/neon.jsonld

CoE instance of repo: https://github.com/cicoe/NEON-schema.org
https://www.crossref.org/services/funder-registry/




